THE ART OF DIVINE MEDITATION; 

PROFITABLE FOR ALL CHRISTIANS 
TO KNOW AND PRACTISE : 

SXBMPLIFIIED WITH 

TWO LARGE PATTERNS OF MEDITATION ; 

THE ONE OF ETERNAL LIFE, AS THE END; THE OTHER 
OF DEATH, AS THE WAY. 



BY JOS. HALL. 



TO THE BIOHT WORSHIPFUL 

Sift RICHARD LEA, KNT. 

ALL IKORBASE OF TRUE HONOUR WITH GOD AND MEN. 



Sir, — Ever since I began to bestow myself upon the common good, study- 
ing wherein my labours might be most senriceable ; I still fbund they could 
be no way so well improved as in that part which oonoemeCh devotion and 
the practice of true piety. For, on the one side, I perceived the number 
of polemical books rather to breed than end strifes ; and those which are 
doctrinal, by reason of their multitude, rather to oppress than satisfy the 
reader; wherein, if we write the same things we are judged tedious; if 
different, singular. On the other part, respecting the reader, I saw the 
brains of men never more stufied, their tongues never more stirring, their 
hearts never more empty, nor their hands more idle. Wherefore, after those 
sudden Meditations which passed me without rule*, I was easily induoed by 
their success, as a small thing moves the willing, to send forth this ' Rule of 
Meditation ;' and after my ' Heaven upon Earth,' to discourse, although by way 

* Alluding to his Three Centuries of Meditations and Vows. — Pratt. 



Chap. I.] The Art of Divine Meditation, 47 

of example, of heaven above. In this Art of mine, I confess to have received 
isMte light from one obscure nameless monk, which wrote some hundred and 
twelve years ago, than from the directions of all other writers. I would his 
humility had not made him niggardly of his name, that we might have known 
' whom to have thanked. It had been easy to have framed it with more curi- 
osity; but God and my soid know, that I made profit the scope of my labour, 
and not applause ; and therefbre to cfaooee, I wished rather to be rude than 
unprofitable. If now the simplicity of any raader shall bereave him of the 
benefit of my precepts, I know he may make his use of my examples. • Why 
I have honoured it with your name,. I need not give account to the world, 
which already knoweth your worth and deserts, and shall see by this that I 
acknowledge them. Go you on happily, according to the heavenly advice of 
your Junius, in your worthy and glorious profession ; still bearing yourself 
as one that knoweth virtue the truest nobility, and religion the best virtue. 
The God whom you serve shall honour you with men, and crown you in 
heaven. To his grace I humbly commend you ; requesting you only to ac* 
cept the work, and continue your favour to the author. 

Your Worship's humbly devoted 

JOS. HALL. 



CHAPTER I. 

The benefit and uses of meditation. — Which are universal to all 
Christians, and not to he appropriated to some professions. 

It is not, I suppose, a more bold than profitable labour, after 
the endeavours of so many contemplative men, to teach the art of 
meditation : an heavenly business as any that belongeth either to 
man or Christian ; and such as whereby the soul doth unspeak- 
ably benefit itself. For by this do we ransack our deep and false 
hearts; fiud out our secret enemies; buckle with them, expel 
them ; arm ourselves against their re-entrance : by this, we make 
use of all good means, fit ourselves to all good duties ; by this we 
descry our weakness ; obtain redress ; prevent temptations ; cheer 
up our solitariness ; temper our occasions of delight ; get more 
light unto our knowledge, more heat to our affections, more life 
to our devotion : by this, we grow to be, as we are, strangers 
upon earth ; and out of a right estimation of all earthly things 
into a sweet fruition of invisible comforts: by this, we see our 
Saviour, with Stephen ; we talk with God, as Moses : and by 
this we are ravished, with blessed Paul, into paradise ; and see 
that heaven, which we are loath to leave, which we cannot 
utter. This alone is the remedy of security and worldUness, the 
pastime of saints, the ladder of heaven, and, in st^ort, the best 



48 Practical Works. 

improvement of Christianity. Learn it who can, and neglect it 
who list ; he shall never find joy, neither in God nor in himself, 
which doth not both know and practise it. 

And^ however of old some hidden cloisters have engrossed it to 
themselves^ and confined it within their cells, who indeed, profess- 
ing nothing but contemplation, through their immunity from those 
cares which accompany an active life, might have the best leisure 
to this business ; yet, seeing there is no man so taken up with 
action as not sometimes to have a free mind ; and there is no 
reasonable mind so simple as not to be able both to discourse 
somewhat and to better itself by her secret thoughts ; I deem it 
an envious wrong to conceal that from any whose benefit may be 
universal. Those that have but a little stock had need to know 
the best rules of thrift. 

Chap. II. — Tfie description and kinds of meditation. 

Thb rather, for that whereas our divine meditation is nothing 
else but a bending of the mind' upon some spiritual object through 
divers forms of discourse, until our thoughts come to an issue ; 
and this must needs be either extemporal, and occasioned by out- 
ward occurrences offered to the mind, or deliberate and wrought 
out of our own heart ; which again is either in matter of know- 
ledge, for the finding out of some hidden truth, and convincing 
of an heresy by profound traversing of reason ; or in matter of 
affection, for the enkindling of our love to God : the former of 
these two last, we, sending to the schools and masters of con- 
troversies, search after the latter ; which is both of larger use, 
and such as no Christian can reject, as either unnecessary or over- 
difiScult : for, both every Christian had need of fire put to his 
affections ; and weaker judgments are no less capable of this 
divine heat, which proceeds not so much from reason as from 
faith. One saith, and I believe him, that God's school is more of 
affection than understanding: both lessons very needful, very- 
profitable ; but for this age especially the latter : for if there be 
some that have much zeal, little knowledge ; there ai*e more that 
have much knowledge without zeal : and he that hath much skill 
and no affection may do good to others by information of judg- 
ment, but shall never have thank, either of his own heart or of 
God, who useth not to cast away his love on those of whom he is 
but known, not loved. 



Chap. III.] The Art of Divine Meditation, 49 

Chap. III. — Concerning meditation extemporal. 
Of extemporal meditation there may be much use, no rule; 
forasmuch as our conceits herein vary according to the infinite 
multitude of objects, and their diverse manner of proffering them- 
selves to the mind ; as also for the suddenness of this act. Man 
is placed in this stage of the world, to view the several natures 
and actions of the creature ; to view them, not idly, without his 
use, as they do him. God made all these for man, and man for 
his own sake. Both these purposes were lost, if man should let 
the creatures pass carelessly by him ; only seen, not thought 
upon. He only can make benefit of what he sees ; which if he 
do not, it is all one as if he were blind or brute. Whence it 
is that wise Solomon putteth the sluggard to school unto the 
ant, and our Saviour sendeth the distrustful to the lily of the 
field. In this kind was that meditation of the divine Psalmist ; 
which, upon the fiew of the glorious frame of the heavens, was 
led to wonder at the merciful respect God hath to so poor a 
creature as man. Thus our Saviour took occasion of the water 
fetched up solemnly to the altar from the well of Shilo on the 
day of the great Hosannah, to meditate and discourse of the 
water of life. Thtis holy and sweet Augustin, from occasion of 
the watercourse near to his lodging, running among the pebbles, 
sometimes more silently, sometimes in a baser murmur, and some- 
times in a shriller note, entered into the thought and dbcourse 
of that excellent order which God hath settled in all these inferior 
things. Thus that learned and heavenly soul of our late Estye, 
when we sat together and heard a sweet concert of music, seemed 
upon this occasion carried up for the time beforehand to the 
place of his rest, saying, not without some passion, '^ What music 
may we think there ia in heaven P Thus lastly, for who knows 
not that examples of this kind are infinite? that faithful and 
reverend Deering^, when the sun shined on his face, now lying on 
bis deathbed, fell into a sweet meditation of the glory of God 
and his approaching joy. The thoughts of this nature are not 
only lawful, but so behoveful, that we cannot omit them without 
neglect of God, his creatures, ourselves. The creatures are half 
lost, if we only employ them, not learn something of them : God 
is wronged, if his creatures be unregarded ; ourselves most of all, 
if we read this great volume of the creatures, and take out no 
lesson for our instruction. 

^ [See Fuller's Oh. Hist. B. ix. as.] 
BP. HALL, VOL. TI. B 



50 Practical Works. 

Chap. IV. — Cautions of extemporal meditation. 
Whbbbin yet caution is to be had, that our meditations be not 
either too farfetched or sayouring of superstition. Farfetched 
I call those which have not a fair and easy resemblance unto the 
matter from whence they are raised ; in which case our thoughts 
prove loose and heartless, making no memorable impression in 
the mind. Superstitious, when we make choice of those grounds 
of meditation which are forbidden us, as teachers of vanity ; or 
employ our own devices, though well-grounded, to an use above 
their reach; making them, upon our own pleasures, not only 
furtherances, but parts of God's worship: in both which our 
meditations degenerate, and grow rather perilous to the soul. 
Whereto add, that the mind be not too much cloyed with too 
frequent iteration of the same thought ; which at last breeds a 
weariness in ourselves, and an unpleasantness of that conceit 
which at the first entertainment promised much delight. Our 
nature is too ready to abuse familiarity in any kind ; and it is 
with meditations as with medicines , which, with over-ordinary 
use, lose their sovereignty, and fill instead of purging. God 
hath not straited us for matter, having given us the scope of the 
whole world ; so that there is no creature, event, action, speech, 
which may not afford us new matter of meditation. And that 
which we are wont to say of fine wits, we may as truly affirm of 
the Christian heart, that it can make use of any thing. Where- 
fore, as travellers in a foreign country make every sight a lesson, 
so ought we in this our pilgrimage. Thou seest the heaven roll- 
ing above thy head in a constant and unmovable motion; the 
stars so overlooking one another, that the greatest show little, 
the least greatest, all glorious ; the air full of the bottles of rain, 
or fleeces of snow, or divers forms of fiery exhalations ; the sea, 
under one uniform face, full of strange and monstrous shapes 
beneath ; the earth so adorned with variety of plants, ,that thou 
canst not but tread on many at once with every foot; besides 
the store of creatures that fly about it, walk upon it, live in it. 
Thou idle truant, dost thou learn nothing of so many masters ? 
Hast thou so long read these capital letters of God's great book, 
and canst thou not yet spell one word of them ? The brute crea- 
tures see the same things with as clear, perhaps better eyes : if 
thine inward eyes see not their use, as well as thy bodily eyes 
their shape, I know not whether is more reasonable or less 
brutish. 



Chap. VI. ] The Art of Divine Meditation. 51 

Chap. V. — Of meditation deliberate. — Wherein, firsts, the quali- 
ties of the person :— o^ wfumi is required, first, that he be pure 
from his sins. 

Dbliberatb meditation is that we chiefly inquire for; which 
both may be well guided, and shall be not a little furthered by 
precepts : part whereof the labours of others shall yield us ; and 
part, the plainest mistress, experience. 

Wherein order requires of us, first, the qualities of the person 
fit for meditation ; then the circumstances, manner, and proceed- 
ings of the work. 

The hill of meditation qiay not be climbed with a profane foot : 
but, as in the delivery of the Law, so here,' no beast may touch 
God's hill, lest he die; only the pure of heart have promise 
to see God. Sin dimmeth and dazzleth the eye, that it cannot 
behold spiritual things. The guard of heavenly soldiers was 
about Elisha's servant, before : he saw them not before, through 
the scales of his infidelity. The soul must therefore be purged 
ere it can profitably meditate. And as of old they were Trent to 
search for and thrust out malefactors from the presence, ere they 
went to sacrifice ; so must we our sins, ere we offer our thoughts 
to God. First, saith David, / unll wash my hands in innocency^ 
then I unit compass thine altar. Whereupon, not unfitly, did 
that worthy chancellor of Paris make the first stair of his ladder 
of contemplation humble repentance. The cloth that is white, 
which is wont to be the colour of innocency, is capable of any 
dye ; the black, of none other. Not that we require an absolute 
perfection ; which, as it is incident unto none, so if it were, would 
exclude all need and use of meditation ; but rather an honest 
sincerity of the heart, not willingly sinning, willingly repenting 
when we have sinned : which whoso finds in himself, let him not 
think any weakness a lawful bar to meditation. He that pleads 
this excuse lA Uke some simple man, which, being half starved 
with cold, refuseth to come near the fire, because he findeth not 
heat enough in himself. 

Chap. VI. — Secondly^ that he be free from worldly thot^ghts. 

Nblthbr may the soul that hopeth to profit by meditation suf- 
fer itself for the time entangled with the world, which is all one 
as to come to God'^s flaming bush on the hill of visions with our 
shoes on our feet. Thou seest the bird whose feathers are limed 
unable to take her former flight; so are we, when our thought^ 

B 2 



6a Practical Works. 

are clinged together by the worlds to soar up to our heayen in 
meditatiDn. The pair of brothers must leave their nets if they 
will follow Christ ; Elisha his oxen, if he will attend a prophet. 
It must be a free and a light mind that can ascend this mount of 
contemplation, overcoming this height^ this steepness. Cares are 
an heavy load and uneasy ; these must be laid down at the bottom 
of this hill if we ever look to attain the top. Thou art loaded 
with household cares, perhaps public ; I bid thee not cast them 
away ; even these have their season^ which thou canst not omit 
without impiety ; I bid thee lay them down at thy closet door 
when thou attemptest this work. Let them in with thee, thou 
shalt find them troublesome companions, ever distracting thee 
from thy best errand. Thou wouldest think of heaven, thy barn 
comes in thy way ; or perhaps thy 'count book, or thy coffers ; or^ 
it may be, thy mind is beforehand travelling up on the morrow's 
journey. So while thou thinkest of many things, thou thinkest of 
nothing ; while thou wouldest go many ways, thou standest still. 
And as in a crowd, while many press forward at once through 
one door none proceedeth ; so when variety of thoughts tumult- 
uously throng in upon the mind, each proveth a bar to the other, 
and all an hinderance to him that entertains them. 

Chap. VII. — Thirdly ^ that he be constant; and that, first, in 
time and matter. 

And as our cUent of meditation must both be pure and free 
in undertaking this task, so also constant in continuing it ; con- 
stant both in time and in matter; both in a set course and 
hour reserved for this work, and in an unwearied prosecution of 
it once begun. Those that meditate by snatches and uncertain 
fits, when only all other employments forsake them, or when 
good motions are thrust upon them by necessity, let them never 
hope to reach to any perfection ; for these feeble beginnings of 
lukewarm grace, which are wrought in them by one fit of .serious 
meditation, are soon extinguished by intermission, and by mis- 
wonting perish. This day's meal, though large and liberal, 
strengthens thee not for to-morrow ; the body langmsheth if there 
be not a daily supply of repast. Thus feed thy soul by meditation. 
Set thine hours and keep them, and yield not to an easy dis- 
traction. There is no hardness in this practice but in the begin- 
ning; use shall give it, not ease only, but delight. Thy companion 
entertaineth thee this while in loving discourses, or some unex- 



Chap. VIIL] The Art of Divine MeditoHon. 68 

pected business offers to interrupt thee; never any good work 
shall want some hinderance ; either break through the lets, except 
it be with incivility or loss ; or if they be importunate, pay thyself 
the time that was unseasonably borrowed, and recompense thine 
omitted hours with the double labours of another day. For thou 
shalt find that deferring breeds, besides the loss, an indisposition 
to good ; so that what was before pleasant to thee, being omitted, 
to-morrow grows harsh, the next day unnecessary, afterward 
odious. To-day thou canst, but wilt not ; to-morrow thou couldest, 
but listest not ; the next day thou neither wilt nor canst bend thy 
mind on these thoughts. So I have seen friends, that upon neglect 
of duty grow overly ; upon overliness, strange ; upon strangeness, 
to utter defiance. Those whose very trade is divinity, methinks, 
should omit no day without his line of meditation ; those which 
are secular men, not many ; remembering that they have a common 
calling of Christianity to attend, as well as a special vocation in 
the world; and that other, being more noble and important^ may 
justly challenge both often and diligent service. 

Chap. VIII. — Secondly, that he be constant in the continuance^ 
And as this constancy requires thee to keep day with thyself, 
unless thou wilt prove bankrupt in good exercises ; so also that thy 
mind should dwell upon the same thought without flitting, without, 
weariness, until it have attained to some issue of spiritual profit ; 
otherwise it attempteth much, effecteth nothing. What availeth 
it to knock at the door of the heart, if we depart ere we have an 
answer ? What are we the warmer if we pass hastily along by the 
hearth and stay not at it ? Those that do only travel through 
Afric become not blackamoors ; but those which are born there, 
those that inhabit there. We account those damsels too light of 
their love which betrothe themselves upon the first sight, upon the 
first motion ; and those we deem of much price which require long 
and earnest soliciting. He deceiveth himself that thinketh grace 
so easily won ; there must be much suit and importunity ere it 
will yield to our desires. Not that we call for a perpetuity of this 
labour of meditation; human frailty could never bear so great a toil.. 
Nothing under heaven is capable of a continual motion without 
complaint ; it is enough for the glorified spirits above to be ever 
thinking and never weary. The mind of man is of a strange 
metal ; if it be not used, it rusteth ; if used hardly, it breaketh : 
briefly, it is sooner dulled than satisfied with a continual medi- 



54 Practical Works. 

tation. Whence it came to pass that those ancient monks who 
intermeddled bodily labour with their contemplations proved so 
excellent in this divine business ; when those at this daj^ which 
having mewed and mured up themselves from the world, spend 
themselves wholly upon their beads and crucifix^ pretending 
no other work but meditation^ have cold hearts to God, and to 
the world show nothing but a dull shadow of devotion ; for that, 
if the thoughts of these latter were as divine as they are super- 
stitious, yet being without all interchangeableness bent upon the 
same discourse^ the mind must needs grow weary, the thoughts 
remiss and languishing, the objects tedious ; while the other re- 
freshed themselves with this wise variety ; employing the hands 
while they called off the mind, as good comedians «o mix their 
parts, that the pleasantness of the one may temper the austere- 
ness of the other ; whereupon they gained both enough to the 
body, and to the soul more than if it had been all the while busied. 
Besides, the excellency of the object letteth this assiduity of me- 
ditation, which is so glorious, that^ like unto the sun^ it may abide 
to have an eye cast upon it for a while, will not be gazed upon ; 
whosoever ventureth so far^ loseth both his hope and his wits. If 
we hold with that blessed Monica^, that such like cogitations are 
the food of the mind ; yet even the mind also hath her satiety, 
and may surfeit of too much. It shall be sufficient therefore that 
we persevere in our meditation without any such affectation of 
perpetuity, and leave vrithout a light fickleness ; making always 
not our hour-glass, but some competent increase of our devotion, 
the measure of our continuance ; knowing that, as for heaven, so 
for our pursuit of grace, it shall avail us little to have begun well 
without perseverance ; and withal, that the soul of man is not al- 
ways in the like disposition, but sometimes is longer in settling, 
through some unquietness or more obstinate distraction; sometimes 
heavier, and sometimes more active and nimble to despatch. Ger- 
son, whose authority (saving our just quarrel against him for the 
Council of Constance <^), I rather use because our adversaries dis- 
claim him for theirs, professeth he hath been sometimes four hours 
together working his heart ere he could frame it to purpose ; a sin- 
gular pattern of unwearied constancy, of an unconquerable spirit, 
whom his present unfitness did not so much discourage as it whetted 

d [The mother of St. Augustine.] rome of Prague. — L'Enfa/iU, Hist, du 

« [AUuding probably to the active Cone, de Const, lib. ii. c. 83.] 
part he took at the Council against Je- 



Chap. IX.] The Art of Divine. Meditation. 55 

him to strive with himself till he could oyercome. And surely 
othor victories are hazardous ; this certain if we will persist to 
strive : other fights are upon hope ; this upon assurance, while 
our success dependeth upon the promise of Ood, which cannot dis- 
appoint us. Persist therefore, and prevail ; persist till thou hast 
prevailed ; so that which thou begannest with difficulty shidl end 
in comfort. 

Chap. IX. — Of the circumstances of meditation .'^^and therein, 
firsty of the place. 

From the quaUties of the person we descend towards the action 
itself: where first we meet with those arcumstances which are 
necessary for our predisposition to the work^ place^ time^ site of 
the body. 

Solitariness of place is fittest for meditation. Retire thyself 
from others if thou wouldest talk profitably with thyself. So 
Jesus meditates alone in the mount; Isaac in the fields; John 
Baptist in the desert; David on his bed; Chrysostom in the 
bath : each in several places, but all solitary. There is no place 
free from God, none to which he is more tied ; one finds his closet 
most convenient^ where his eyes, being limited by the known 
walls, call the mind, after a sort, from wandering abroad ; another 
findeth his soul more free when it beholdeth his heaven above 
and about him. It matters not, so he be solitary and silent. It was 
a witty and divine speech of Bernard, that the Spouse of the Soul, 
Christ Jesus, is bashful, neither willingly cometh to his bride in 
the presence of a multitude. And hence is that sweet invitation 
which we find of her : Come, my well beloved t let us go forth into 
the fields; let vs lodge in the villages. Let us go up early to the 
vines : let us see if the vine flourish, whether it hath disclosed 
the first grape ; or whether the pomegranates blossom : there 
will I give thee my love. Abandon therefore all worldly society, 
that thou mayest change it for the company of God and bis angels : 
the society, J say, of the world ; not outward only, but inward 
also. There be many that sequester themselves from the visible 
company of men, which yet carry a world within them ; who being 
alone in body, are haunted with a throng of fancies ; as Jerome, 
in his wildest desert, found himself too oft in his thoughts amongst 
the dances of the Roman dames. This company is worse than the 
other ; for it is more possible for some thoughtful men to have a 
solitary mind in the midst of a market, than for a man thus dis- 



66 Practical Works, 

posed to be alone in a wilderness. Both companies are enemies 
to meditations; whither tendeth that ancient connsel of a great 
master in this art, of three things requisite to this business, secresj, 
silence, rest : whereof the first excludeth company ; the second, 
noise ; the third, motion. It cannot be spoken how subject we 
are in this work to distraction ; like Solomon's old man, whom 
the noise of every bird wakeneth. Sensual delights we are not 
drawn from with the threefold cords of judgment, but our spi- 
ritual pleasures are easily hindered. Make choice therefore of 
that place which shall admit the fewest occasions of withdrawing 
thy soul from good thoughts ; wherein also eyen change of places 
IS somewhat prejudicial ; and I know not how it falls out, that we 
find God nearer us in the place where we have been accustomed 
familiarly to meet him : not for that his presence is confined to 
one place above others ; but that our thoughts are, through custom, 
more easily gathered to the place where we have ordinarily con- 
versed with him. 

Chap. X. — Secondly, of the time. 
Onb time cannot be prescribed to all : for neither is God bound 
to hours, neither doth the contrary disposition of men agree in 
one choice of opportunities. The golden hours of the morning 
some find fittest for meditation ; when the body, newly raised, is 
well calmed with his late rest ; and the soul hath not as yet had 
from these outward things any motives of alienation. Others 
find it best to learn wisdom of their reins in the night ; hoping, 
with Job, that their bed will bring them comfort in their medita- 
tion ; when, both all other things are still, and themselves, 
wearied with these earthly cares, do, out of a contempt of them, 
grow into greater liking and love of heavenly things. I have 
ever found Isaac's time fittest, who went out in the evening to 
meditate. No precept, no practice of others, can prescribe to us 
in this circumstance. It shall be enough, that, first, we set our- 
selves a time ; secondly, that we set apart that time wherein we 
are aptest for this service. And as no time is prejudiced with 
unfitness, but every day is without difference seasonable for this 
work, so especially God's day. No day is barren of grace to the 
searcher of it ; none alike fruitful to this : which being by God 
sanctified to himself, and to be sanctified by us to God, is privi- 
leged with blessings above others : for the plentiful instruction of 
that day stirrcth thee up to this action, and fills thee with matter ; 



Chap. XI.] The Art of Divine Meditation. 67 

and the zeal of thy public service warmeth thy heart to this other 
bosinefis of devotioik No manna fell to the Israelites on their 
sabbath ; our spiritual manna falleth on ours most frequent. If 
thou wouJdest haye a full soul^ gather as it falls ; gather it by 
hearing, readings meditation : spiritual idleness is a fault this day, 
perhaps not less than bodily work. 

Chap. XL — Of the site and gesture of the body. 
Nbttheb is there less variety in the site and gesture of the 
body ; the due composedness whereof is no little advantage to this 
exercise. Even in our speech to God, we observe not always one 
and the same position : sometimes^ we fall grovelling on our faces ; 
sometimes, we bow our knees; sometimes, stand on our feet; 
sometimes, we hft up our hands; sometimes, cast down our eyes. 
God vA spirit ; who therefore, being a severe observer of the 
dii^sition of the soul, is not scrupulous for the body ; requiring 
not 60 much that the gesture thereof should be uniform as 
reverent. No marvel, therefore, though in this all our teachers 
of meditation have commended several positions of body, according 
to their disposition and practice ; one, (Gerson,) sitting with the 
face turned up to heavenward, according to the precept of the 
philosopher, who taught him, that by sitting and resting the mind 
gathereth wisdom: another, (Guliel. Paris. ^ leaning to some rest 
towards the left side, for the greater quieting of the heart : a 
third, (Dionys. Carthus.6) standing with the eyes lift up to heaven ; 
but shut for fear of distractions. But of all other, methinketh, 
Isaac's choice the best, who meditated walking. In this, let every 
man be his own master ; so be, we use that frame of body that 
may both testify reverence, and in some cases help to stir up 
further devotion ; which also must needs be varied, according to 
the matter of our meditation. If we think of our sins, Ahab's 
soft pace, the publican's dejected eyes, and his hand beating his 
breast, are most seasonable : if of the joys of heaven, Stephen's 
countenance fixed above, and David's hands lift up on high, are 
most fitting. In all which the body, as it is the instrument and 
vassal of the soul, so will easily follow the affections thereof; and, 
in truth, then is our devotion most kindly, when the body is thus 
commanded his service by the spirit, and not suffered to go before 
it, and by his forwardness to provoke his master to emulation. 

f ["GhUiehnufl Episc. ParU. patria Alvemns." Trithem.] 
K [DionynuA a Biokel Burnamed *' Doctor EcstaticuB."] 



68 Practical Works. 

Chap. XII. — Of the matter and subject of cur meditation. 

Now time and order call us from these qircumstances to the 
matter and subject of meditation: which must be divine and 
spiritual, not evil nor worldly. the carnal and unprofitable 
thoughts of men I We all meditate : one, how to do iU to others ; 
another, how to do some earthly good to himself; "another^ to 
hurt himself under a colour of good ; as how to accomplish his 
lewd desires, the fulfilling whereof proyeth the bane of the soul ; 
how he may sin unseen, and go to hell with the least noise of the 
world. Or perhaps some better minds bend their thoughts upon 
the search of natural things ; the motions of every heaven and of 
every star ; the reason and course of the ebbing and flowing of 
the sea ; the manifold kinds of simples that grow out of the earth, 
and creatures that creep upon it, with all their strange qualities 
and operations; or perhaps the several forms of gov#nment 
and rules of state take up their busy heads : so that, while they 
would be acquainted with the whole world, they are strangers at 
home ; and while they seek to know all other things, they re- 
main unknown of themselves. The God that made them, the 
vileness of their nature, the danger of their sins, the multitude of 
their imperfections, the Saviour that bought them, the heaven 
that he bought for them, are in the mean time as unknown, as 
unregarded, as if they were not. Thus do foolish children spend 
their time and labour in turning over leaves to look for painted 
babes, not at all respecting the solid matter under their hands. 
We fools, when will we be wise, and, turning our eyes from 
vanity, with that sweet singer of Israel, make God's statutes 
our song and meditation in the house of our pilgrimage ? Earthly 
things proffer themselves with importunity ; heavenly things must 
with importunity be sued to. Those, if they were not so htUe 
worth would not be so forward, and being forward need not any 
meditation to solicit them ; these, by how much more hard they 
are to entreat, by so much more precious they are being obtidned, 
and therefore worthier our endeavour. As then we cannot go 
amiss so long as we keep ourselves in the track of divinity, while 
the soul is taken up with the thoughts either of the Deity in 
his essence and persons, (sparingly yet in this point, and more in 
faith and admiration than inquiry,) or of his attributes, his justice, 
power, wisdom, mercy, truth ; or of his works, in the creation, 
preservation, government of all things ; according to the Psalmist, 
/ will meditate of the beauty of thy glorious Majesty, and thy 
wonderful works ; so most directly in our way, and best fitting 



Chap. XIV.] The Art o/Ditnne Meditation. 69 

our exercise of meditation^ are those matters in divinity which can 
most of all work companction in the heart, and most stir us up to 
deyotion. Of which kind are the meditations concerning Christ 
Jesus our Mediator; his incarnation^ miracles, Ufe, passion, burial^ 
resurrection, ascension, intercession ; the benefit of our redemption, 
the certainty of our election^ the graces and proceeding of our 
sanctification, our glorious estate in paradise lost in our first parents, 
our present vileness, our inclination to sin, our several actual 
offences, the temptations and sleights of evil angels, the use of the 
sacraments, nature and practice of faith and repentance, the 
miseries of our life, with the frailty of it, the certainty and uncer- 
tainty of our death, the glory of Qod^s saints above, the awfulness 
of judgment, the terrors of hell ; and the rest of this quality ; 
wherein both it is fit to have variety, for that even the strongest 
stomach doth not always delight in one dish, and yet so to change 
that our choice may be free from wildness and inconstancy. 

Chap. XIII. — The order of the work itself. 
Now, after that we have thus orderly suited the person and his 
qualities, with the due circumstances of time, place, disposition of 
body, and substance of the matter discussed, I know not what can 
remain besides the main business itself, and the manner and de- 
grees of our prosecution thereof; which, above all other, calleth 
for an intentive reader and resolute practice. Wherein, that we 
may avoid all niceness and obscurity, since we strive to profit, we 
will give direction for the entrance, proceeding, conclusion of this 
divine work. 

Chap. XIV. — J7i€ entrance into the work: — i. The common 
entrance, which is prayer. 

A oooDLT building must show some magnificence in the gate ; 
and great personages have seemly ushers to go before them, who 
by their uncovered heads command reverence and way. 

Even very poets of old had wont, before their ballads, to im- 
plore the aid of their gods ; and the heathen Romans entered 
not upon any public civil business without a solemn appreca- 
tion of good success : how much less should a Christian dare to 
undertake a spiritual work of such importance, not having craved 
the assistance of his God ; which, methinks, is no less than to 
profess he could do well without Qod's leave. When we think 
evil, it is from ourselves ; when good, from Ood. As prayer is our 
speech to God, so is each good meditation, according to Bernard 



eO Practical Works. 

Ood's speech to the heart; the heart must speak to God, that 
God may speak to it. Prayer therefore and meditation are as 
those famous twins in the story, or as two loving turtles, whereof 
separate one, the other languisheth : prayer maketh way for 
meditation ; meditation giveth matter, strength, and life to our 
prayers ; by which, as all other things are sanctified to us, so we 
are sanctified to all holy things. This is as some royal eunuch, 
to perfume and dress our souls, that they may be fit to conyerse 
with the King of Heaven. But the prayer that leadeth in medi- 
tation would not be long, requiring rather that the extension and 
length should be put into the vigour and fervency of it ; for that 
is not here intended to be the principal business, but an introduc- 
tion to another, and no otherwise than as a portal to this building 
of meditation. The matter whereof shall be, that the course of 
our meditation may be guided aright and blessed ; that all dis- 
tractions may be avoided, our judgment enUghtened, our inven- 
tions quickened, our wills rectified, our affections whetted to 
heavenly things, our hearts enlarged to God-ward, our devotion, 
enkindled : so that we may find our corruptions abated, our graces 
thriven, our souls and lives every way bettered by this exercise. 

Chap. XV. — Particular and proper entrance into the matter, 
which is in our choice thereof. 

Such is the common entrance into this work. There is another 
yet more particular and proper, wherein the mind, recollecting 
itself, maketh choice of that theme or matter whereupon it will 
bestow itself for the present, settling itself on that which it hath 
chosen; which is done by an inward inquisition made into our 
heart of what we both do and should think upon, rejecting what 
is unexpedient and unprofitable. In both which the soul, like 
unto some noble hawk, lets pass the crows and larks, and such 
other worthless birds that cross her way, and stoopeth upon a fowl 
of price, worthy of her flight ; after this manner. 

" What wilt thou muse upon, O my soul ? Thou seest how 
little it availeth thee to wander and rove about in uncertainties ; 
thou findest how little favour there is in these earthly things 
wherewith thou hast wearied thyself. Trouble not thyself any 
longer, with Martha, about the many and needless thoughts of 
the world ; none but heavenly things can afford thee comfort. 
Up then, my soul, and mind those things that are above, whence 
thyself art ; amongst all which, wherein shouldcst thou rather 



Chap. XYI.] The Art of Divine Meditation. 61 

meditate than of the life and glory of God^s saints? A worthier 
employment thou canst noTer find, than to think upon that estate 
thou shalt once possess, and now desirest/' 

Chap. XVI. — The proceeding of our meditation; and therein a 
method allowed by som£ authors rejected by us. 

HrrHBBTO the entrance. After which our meditation must 
proceed in due order, not troubledly, not preposterously. It 
begins in the understandings endeth in the affection; it begins 
in the brain^ descends to the heart; begins on earth, ascends to 
heayen ; not suddenly^ but by certain stairs and degrees^ till we 
come to the highest. 

I have found a subtle scale of meditation, admired by some 
professors of this art aboye all other human devices, and far 
preferred by them to the best directions of Origen, Austin, Ber- 
nard, Hugo Bonaventure, Gerson, and whosoever hath been re- 
puted of greatest perfection in this skiU. The several stairs 
whereof, lest I should seem to defraud my reader through envy, 
I would willingly describe, were it not that I feared to scare him 
rather with the danger of obscurity from venturing further upon 
this so worthy a business ; yet, lest any man perhaps might com- 
plain of an unknown loss, my margin shall find room for that 
which 1 hold too knotty for my text^. In all which, after the 

^ The scale of meditation of an author, ancient bat nameleM. 
Degreei qf Preparation, 
I Question. Wh.tl{^ij^ 

3 Ezcuacion. A repelling of what I should not think. 

3 Choice, 1 r neceeaarjr. 

or ^ Of what meet < eirpedieDt. 

Election. J L comely. 

Degrees qf Proceeding m the Understanding, 

4 Commemoration. An actual thinking upon the matter elected. 
' A redoubled coomiemoration of the same till it be 



5Can«de«tion. {^ ^^ 

6 Attention { ^ ^'^ '^P^ earnest consideration, whereby it is 

L fiMtened in the mind. 

7 Explanation . . 

STractation. .. 



9 Dijudication. . 
10 Cuisation. . . . 



II Rumination. 



A clearing of the thing considered by similitudes. 

{An extending the thing considered to other points, 
where all questions of doubts are discussed. 
An estimation of the worth of the thing thus handled. 
A confirmation of the estimation thus made. 

{A sad and serious meditation of all the former, till it 
may work upon the afiections. 
From hence to the degrees of afflAtion. 



68 Practical Wtyrka. 

incredible commendations of some practitioners, I doubt not bat 
an ordinary reader will easily espy a doable fault at the least, 
darkness and coincidence ; that they are both too obscurely de- 
livered, and that divers of them fall into other, not without some 
vain superfluity. For this part therefore, which concerneth the 
understandings I had rather to require only a deep and firm con- 
sideration of the thing propounded ; which shall be done, if we 
follow it in our discourse through all or the principal of those 
places which natural reason doth afford us. Wherein, let no man 
plead ignorance^ or fear difficulty ; we are all thus far born logi- 
cians^ neither is there in this so much need of skill as of industry. 
In which course yet we may not be too curious, in a precise search 
of every place and argument, without omission of any, though to 
be fetched in with racking the invention ; for as the mind^ if it go 
loose, and without rule, roves to no purpose ; so if it be too much 
fettered with the gyves of strict regularity, moveth nothing at all. 

Chap. XVII. — Premonitions concerning our proceeding in the 
first part of meditation. 

Erb I enter, therefore, into any particular tractation, there are 
three things whereof I would premonish my reader, concerning 
this first part, which is in the understanding. 

Firsts that I desire not to bind every man to the same uniform 
proceeding in this part. Practice and custom may perhaps have 
taught other courses^ more familiar and not less direct. If then 
we can, by any other method, work in our hearts so deep an ap- 
prehension of the matter meditated, as it may duly stir the affec- 
tions, it is that only we require. 

Secondly, that whosoever applieth himself to this direction, 
think him not necessarily tied to the prosecution of all these logi- 
cal places, which he findeth in the sequel of our treatise ; so as 
his meditation should be lame and imperfect without the whole 
number : for there are some themes which will not bear all these ; 
as, when we meditate of God, there is no room for causes or com- 
parisons ; and others yield them with such difficulty, that their 
search interrupteth the chief work intended. It shall be sufficient 
if we take the most pregnant and most voluntary.' 

Thirdly, that when we stick in the disposition of any of the 
places following, (as if, meditating of sin, I cannot readily meet 
with the material and formal causes, or the appendances of it,) we 
rack not our minds too much with the inquiry thereof; which 



Chap. XIX.] The Art of Divine Meditation. 68 

were to strive more fgr logic than devotion ; but, without too 
much disturbance of our thoughts, quietly pass over to the next. 
U we break our teeth with the shell, we shall find small pleasure 
in the kernel. 

Now then, for that my only fear is lest this part of my dis- 
course shall seem over-perplexed unto the unlearned reader, I 
will, in this whole process, second my rule with his example ; that 
BO, what might seem obscure in the one may by the other be ex- 
plained ; and the same steps he seeth me take in this, he may 
accordingly tread in any other theme. 

Chap. XVIII. — The practice of meditation, wherein, first, we 
begin with some description of that we meditate of 

FmsT^ therefore, it shall be expedient to consider seriously, 
what the thing is whereof we meditate. 

*' What then, my soul, is the life of the saints, whereof thou 
studiestf Who are the saints, but those which, having been 
weakly holy upon earth, are perfectly holy above ? which even 
on earth were perfectly holy in their Saviour, now are so in 
themselves? which, overcoming on earth, are truly canonized in 
heaven? What is their life, but that blessed estate above, 
wherein their glorified soul hath a full fruition of God ?" 

Chap. XIX. — Secondly, follows an easy and voluntary division 
of the mxitter meditated. 

Thb nature whereof, after we have thus shadowed out to our- 
selves by a description ; not curious always, and exactly framed 
according to the rules of art, but sufiScient for our own conceit ; 
the next is, if it shall seem needful, or if the matter will bear or 
offer it, some easy and voluntary division, whereby our thoughts 
shall have more room made for them, and our proceeding shall be 
more distinct. 

'' There is a life of nature ; when thou, my soul, dwellest in 
this body, and informest thine earthly burden : there is a life of 
grace ; when the Spirit of Qod dwells in thee : there is a life of 
glory ; when the body being united to thee, both shall be united 
to God ; or when, in the mean time, being separated from thy 
companion, thou enjoyest God alone. This life of thine therefore, 
as the other hath his ages, hath his statures : for it entereth upon 
his birth when thou passest out of thy body, and changest this 
earthly house for an heavenly : it enters into his full vigour, when. 



64 Practical Works. 

at the day of the oominon resurrection^ thou resumest this thy 
companion; unlike to itself, like to thee, like to thy Sayiour; 
immortal now, and glorious. ^In this life here, may be degrees; 
there, can be no imperfection. If some be like the sky, others 
like the stars ; yet all shine. If some edt at their Saviour^s right 
hand, others at his left ; all are blessed. If some vessels hold 
more, all are full ; none complaineth of want, none envieth him 
that hath more. 

Chap. XX. — ^3. A consideration of the causes thereof, in all 

kinds of them. 
Which done, it shall be requisite for our perfecter understanding, 
and for the laying grounds of matter for our affection, to carry it 
through those other principal places and heads of reason which 
nature hath taught every man, both for knowledge and ampli- 
fication ; the first whereof are the causes, of all sorts. 

'* Whence is this eternal life, but from him which only is eter- 
nal; which only is the fountain of life; yea, life itself? Who but 
the same God that gives our temporal life giveth also that eternal ? 
the Father bestoweth it, the Son meriteth it, the Holy Ghost 
seals and applieth it. Expect it only from him, my soul, whose 
free election gave thee the first title to it, to be purchased by the 
blood of thy Saviour. For thou shalt not therefore be happy, be- 
cause he saw that thou wouldest be good ; but therefore art thou 
good, because he hath ordained thou shalt be happy. He hath 
ordained thee to life ; he hath given thee a Saviour, to give this 
life unto thee ; faith, whereby thou mightest attain to this Saviour ; 
his word, by which thou mightest attain to this faith : what is 
there in this not his ? And yet, not his so simply, as that it is 
without thee ; without thy merit indeed, not without thine act. 
Thou livest here, through his blessing, but by bread ; thou shalt 
live above, through his mercy, but by thy faith below, appre- 
hending the Author of thy life. And ydt, as he will not save thee 
without thy faith, so thou canst never have faith without his gifl. 
Look to him, therefore, O my soul, as the beginner and finisher 
of thy salvation ; and while thou magnifiest the Author be ravished 
with the glory of the work, which far passeth both the tongue 
of angels and the heart of man. It can no be good thing that is 
not there. How can they want water that have the spring? 
Where God is enjoyed, in whom only all things are good, what 
good can be wanting. And what perfection of bliss is thero 



Chap. XXIL] The Art of Divine Meditation. 65 

where all goodness is met and united I In thy presence is Jul- 
ness of jay ; and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. 
O blessed reflection of glory I we see there as we are seen ; in that 
we are seen, it is our glory ; in that we see^ it is God's glory ; 
therefore doth he glorify us, that our glory should be to his. How 
worthy art thou, Lord, that through us thou shouldest look at 
thyself!" 

Chap. XXL — 4. The consideration of the fruits and effects. 

The next place shall be the fruits and effects following Upon 
their several causes ; which also affords very feeling and copious 
matter to our meditation ; wherein it shall be ever best not so 
much to seek for all, as to choose out the chiefest. 

'^ No marvel then, if from this glory proceed unspeakable joy ; 
and from this joy^ the sweet songs of praise and thanksgiving. 
The Spirit bids us, when we are merry, sing ; how much more 
then, when we are merry without all mixture of sorrow, beyond 
all measure of our earthly affections, shall we sing joyful hallelu- 
jahs and hosannahs to him that dwelleth in the highest heavens ! 
Our hearts should be so full that we cannot choose but sing, and 
we cannot but sing melodiously. There is no jar in this music, no 
end of this song. O blessed change of the saints I they do nothing 
but weep below, and now nothing but sing above. We sowed in 
tears, reap in joy ; there was some comfort in those tears when 
they were at worst, but there is no danger of complaint in this 
heavenly mirth. If we cannot sing here with angels. On earth 
peace^ yet there we shall sing with them, Olory to Ood on high ; 
and, joining our voices to theirs, shall make up that celestial 
concert which none can either hear or bear part in and not be 
happy." 

Chap. XXII. — ^5. Consideration of the subject wherein or 
whereabout it is. 

After which comes to be considered the subject, either wherein 
that is, or whereabout that is employed, which we meditate of; as, 

" And indeed what less happiness doth the yery place promise 
wherein this glory is exhibited ? which is no other than the para- 
dise of God. Here below we dwell, or rather we wander, in a 
cof dnued wilderness ; there we shall rest us in the true Eden ; 
/ am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse. Kings use 
not to dwell in cottages of clay, but in royal courts fit for their 
estate ; how much more shall the King of heaven, who hath pre- 

BP. hall, YOL. VI. F 



66 Practical Works. 

pared for men so fair mansions on earth, make himself an habit- 
ation suitable to his Majesty I Even earthly princes hare dwelt in 
cedar and ivory ; but the great city, Holy Jerusalem, the palace 
of the Highest^ hath her walls of jasper, her building of gold, her 
foundation of precious stones, her gates of pearl : How glorious 
things are spoken of thee^ O thou city of Ood t We see but the 
payement, and yet how goodly it is I The believing Centurion 
thought himself unworthy that Christ should come under his roof; 
yet wert thou, Saviour, in thine humbled estate, in the» form of 
a servant ; how then shall I think myself worthy to come under 
this roof of thine, so shining and glorious ? if this clay of mine 
may come to this honour above, let it be trampled upon and de- 
spised on earth/' 

Chap. XXIII. — 6. Consideration of the appendances and 
qualities of it. 

Sixthly shall follow the appendances and qualities which cleave 
unto the subject whereof we meditate ; as, 

'^ But were the place less noble and majestical, yet the company 
which it affordeth hath enough to make the soul blessed ; for not 
the place giveth ornament to the guest so much as the guest to 
the place. How loath are we to leave this earth only for the society 
of some few friends in whom we delight, which yet are subject 
every day to mutual dislikes I what pleasure shall we then take 
in the enjoying of the saints, when there is nothing in them not 
amiable, nothing in us that may cool the fervour of our love! 
There shalt thou, my soul, thyself glorified, meet with thy dear 
parents and friends alike glorious, never to be severed. There thou 
shalt see and converse with those ancient worthies of the former 
world, the blessed patriarchs and prophets, with the crowned 
martyrs and confessors, with the holy aposties and the fathers of 
that primitive and this present church, shining each one according 
to the measure of his blessed labours. There shalt thou live far- 
miliarly in the sight of those angels whom now then receivest good 
from, but seest not. There, which is the head of all thy felicity, 
thine eyes shall see Him whom now thy heart longeth for ; that 
Saviour of thine, in the only hope of whom now thou livest. Alas I 
how dimly and afar off dost thou now behold him I how imperfectly 
dost thou enjoy him, while every temptation bereaves thee for the 
time of his presence I / sought him whom my soul loveth ; I 
sought him, but found him not. His back is now towards thee 



Chap. XXIV.] The AH of Divine Meditation. 67 

many times through thy sins ; and therefore thou hardly discernest 
him. Otherwhile, and often^ thy back is turned imto him through 
negligence^ that when thou mightest obscurely see him thou dost 
not ; now thou shalt see him, and thine eyes, thus fixed, shall not 
be removed. Tet neither could this glory make us happy^ if^ being 
thus absolute, it were not perpetual. To be happy is not so sweet 
a state^ as it is miserable to hare been happy. Lest aught there- 
fore should be wanting, behold^ this felicity knoweth no end, 
feareth no intermission, and is as eternal for the continuance as 
he that had no beginning. blessedness truly infinite I our 
earthly joys do scarce ever begin^ but when they begin, their end 
bordereth upon their beginning. One hour seeth us ofttimes joy- 
ful and miserable ; here alone is nothing but eternity. If then 
the diTine prophet thought here one day in God's earthly house 
better than a thousand otherwhere, what shall I compare to thou- 
sands of millions of years in God's heavenly temple ? Yea, millions 
of years are not so much as a minute to eternity, and that other 
house not a cottage to this. 

Chap. XXIV. — 7. 0/ that which is diverse from it, or 
contrary to it. 

Sevbkthlt^ our thoughts^ leaving a while the consideration of 
the thing as it is in itself, shall descend unto it as respectively with 
others ; and therefore, first, shall meditate of that which is diverse 
from it, or contrary unto it. 

'^ What dost thou here then, my soul? what dost thou here 
grovelling upon earth, where the best things are vanity, the rest no 
better than vexation? Look round about thee, and see whether thine 
eyes can meet with any thing but either sins or miseries. Those 
few and short pleasures thou seest end ever sorrowfully, and in the 
mean time are intermingled with many grievances. Here thou 
hearest one cry out of a sick body, whereof there is no part which 
affords not choioe of diseases ; this man layeth his hand upon his 
consuming lungs, and complaineth of short wind ; that other, upon 
his rising spleen ; a third shaketh his painful bead ; another roars 
out for the torment of his reins or bladder ; another, for the rack- 
ing of his gouty joints : one is distempered .with a watery dropsy ; 
another, with a windy colic ; a third, with a fiery ague; a fourth, 
with an earthen melancholy: one grovels and foameth with the 
falling sickness ; another lieth bedrid, half senseless, with a dead 

F 2 



68 Practical Works. 

palsy : there are but few bodies that complain not of some disease ; 
and, that thou mayest not look far, it is a wonder if thyself feel 
not always one of these enh within thee. There thou hearest 
another lament his loss ; either his estate is impaired by surety- 
ship^ or stealth, or shipwreck, or oppression; or his child is 
unruly, or miscarried ; or his wife dead or disloyal : another 
tormented with passions : each one is some way miserable. But 
that which is yet more irksome, thy one ear is beaten with 
cursings and blasphemies ; thy other with scornful, or wanton, 
or murdering speeches ; thine eyes see nothing but pride, filthi- 
ness, profaneness, blood, excess, and whatsoever else might yex 
a righteous soul; and, if all the world besides were innocent, 
thou findest enough within thyself to make thyself weary, and 
thy life loathsome. Thou needest not fetch cause of complaint 
from others : thy corruptions yield thee too much at home ; ever 
sinning, ever presuming : sinning, eyen when thou hast repented, 
yea, even while thou repentest, sinning. Go to now, my soul, 
and solace thyself here below ; and suffer thyself besotted with 
these goodly contentments, worthy of no better, while thou fixest 
thyself on these. See if thou canst find any of these above ; and, 
if thou canst meet with any distemper, any loss, any sin, any 
complaint, from thyself or any other above, despise thine heaven 
as much as now thou lovest the earth. Or, it all this cannot 
enough commend unto thee the state of heavenly glory, cast 
down thine eyes yet lower, into that deep and bottomless pit, full 
of horror, full of torment : where there is nothing but flames, and 
tears, and shrieks, and gnashing of teeth ; nothing but fiends 
and tortures : where there is palpable darkness, and yet perpetual 
fire ; where the damned are ever boiling, never consumed ; ever 
dying, never dead ; ever complaining, never pitied : where the 
glutton, that once would not give a crust of bread, now begs for 
one drop of water ; and yet, alas I if whole rivers of water should 
fall into his mouth, how should they quench those rivers of brim- 
stone that feed this flame I where there is no intermission of com- 
plaints ; no breathing from pain ; and, after millions of years, no 
possibility of comfort. And if the rod wherewith thou chastisest 
thy children, O Lord, even in this life, be so smart and galling, 
that they have been brought down to the brim of despair, and 
in the bitterness of their soul have entreated death to release 
them ; what shall I think of their plagues, in whose righteous 



Chap. XXV.] The Art of Divine Meditation. 69 

confusion, thou insultests &d<1 say est. Aha, I will avenge me of 
mine enemies f Even that thou shalt not be thus miserable, O my 
soul, is some kind of happiness ; but that thou shalt be as happy 
as the reprobate are miserable, how worthy is it of more estima. 
tion than thyself is capable oil" 

Chap. XXY. — 8. Of comparisons and similitudes, whereby it 
may be most fitly set forth. 

Aftbb this opposition, the mind shall make comparison of the 
matter meditated with what may nearest resemble it, and shall 
illustrate it with fittest similitudes, which give no small light to 
the understanding, nor less force to the affection. 

'^ Wonder then, O my soul, as much as thou canst, at this 
glory; and in comparison thereof contemn this earth, which 
now thou treadest upon ; whose joys, if they were perfect, are 
but short; and if they were long, are imperfect. One day, 
when thou art above, looking down from the height of thy glory, 
and seeing the sons of men creeping like so many ants on this 
molehill of earth, thou shalt think, ^ Alas, how basely I once lived I 
was yonder silly dungeon the place I so loved, and was so loath 
to leave?' Think so now beforehand; and, since of heaven thou 
canst not, yet account of the earth as it is worthy : how heartless 
and irksome are ye, ye best earthly pleasures, if ye be matched 
with the least of those above I How vile are you, ye sumptuous 
buildings of kings, even if all the entrails of the earth had agreed 
to enrich you, in comparison of this frame not made with hands I 
It is not so high above the earth, in distance of place, as in worth 
and majesty. We may see the face of heaven from the heart of 
the earth ; but from the nearest part of the earth, who can see 
the least glory of heaven i The three disciples on mount Tabor 
saw but a glimpse of this glory shining upon the face of their 
Saviour; and yet, being ravished with the sight, cried out. 
Master, it is good being here; and, thinking of building of three 
tabernacles, (for Christ, Moses, Elias,) could have been content 
themselves to have lien without shelter, so they might always 
have enjoyed that sight. Alas I how could earthly tabernacles 
have fitted those heavenly bodies? They knew what they saw : 

* (The word here replaced from (he lent is not to be found in '* consultest," 

editions of 1614 and 1628 is so offensive which ig the reading of later editions, 

to our ean, from the idea which its The word is clearly intended to repre- 

present nae asBociatee with it, that one sent the righteous vengeance of the 

would gladly substitute for it a less ob- Almighty triumphing over his enemies.] 
jectionable equivalent, but that equiva- 



70 Practical Works. \ 

I 

what they said, they knew not. LiO, these three disciples vert 
not transfigured ; yet how deeply they were affected even wit^ 
the glory of others I How happy shall we be, when oarselro^ 
shall be changed into glorious ; and shall have tabernacles, no^ 
of our own making, but prepared for us by Ood I And yet noi 
tabernacles, but eternal mansions : Moses saw God but a while»i 
and shined : how shall we shine, that shall behold his face foi^, 
ever ? What greater honour is there than in sovereignty ? what 
greater pleasure than in feasting? This life is both a kingdom 
and a feast ! A kingdom : He that wereomes shall rule the no-] 
turns; and shall sit with me in my throne: O blessed promo- 
tion! large dominion and royal seat! to which Solomon's 
throne of ivory was not worthy to become a footstool. A feast: 
Blessed are they that are called to the marriage-supper oftht 
Lamb: feasts have more than necessity of provision, more than 
ordinary diet ; but marriage-feasts yet more than common abun- 
dance ; but the marriage-feast of the Son of God to his blessed 
spouse, the Church, must so far exceed in all heavenly munifi- 
cence and variety, as the persons are of the greater state and 
majesty: there is new wine, pure manna, and all manner of 
spiritual dainties; and, with the continual cheer, a sweet and 
answerable welcome ; while the Bridegroom lovingly cheereth us 
up, Eat, friends ; drink, and make you merry^ well ber 
loved : yea, there shalt thou be, my soul, not a guest, but, how 
unworthy soever, the bride herself, whom he hath everlastingly 
espoused fo himself in truth and righteousness. The contract 
is passed here below; the marriage is consummate above, and 
solemnized with a perpetual feast: so that now thou mayest 
safely say. My welUbeloved is mine^ and I am his : wherefore 
hearken, my soul, and consider, and incline thine ear ; forget 
also thine own people^ and thy father's house, thy supposed 
home of this world : so shall the King have pleasure in thy 
beauty; for he is the Lord, and worship thou him.*' 

Chap. XXVI. — 9. The titles and names of the thing considered, 

Thb very names and titles of the matter considered yield no 
small store to our meditation : which being commonly so imposed, 
that they secretly comprehend the nature of the thing which 
they represent, are not unworthy of our discourse. 

'' What need I seek those resemblances, when the very name 
of life implieth sweetness to men on earth, even to them which 
confess to live with some discontentment ? Surely the tight is a 



Chap. XXVII.] The Art of Divim Meditatim. 71 

pleasant thing; and it is good to the eyes to see the sun]: yet 
when temporal is added to life^ I know not how, this addition 
detracteth something, and doth greatly abate the [pleasure of 
life ; for those which joy to think of Ufe, grieve to think it but 
temporal: so yexing is the end of that whose continuance was 
delightful But now, when there is an addiUon^'above time, of 
eternity, it maketh life so much more sweet as it is more lasting : 
andj lasting infinitely, what can it give less than an infinite con- 
tentaient? O dying and false life which we enjoy here, and 
scarce a shadow and counterfeit of that other I What is, more 
esteemed than glory i which is so predous to men of spirit, that 
it makes them prodigal of their blood, proud of their wounds, 
careless of themselves: and yet, alas! howfpent and how fading 
is this glory, effected with such dangers and death ; hardly, after 
all trophies and monuments, either known to the next sea, or 
surviving him that dieth for it I It is true glory to|triumph in 
heayen, where is neither envy^ nor forgetfulness. What is more 
dear to us than our country? which the worthy and faithful 
patriots of aU times have respected above their- parents, their 
children, their lives ; counting it only happy to live in it, and to 
die for it : the banished man pines for the want of it : the tra- 
veller digesteth all the tediousness of his way, all the sorrows of 
an ill journey, in the only hope of home, forgetting all his foreign 
miseries when he feeleth his own smoke. Where is our country, 
but above? Thence thou earnest, O my soul; thither thou art 
going, in a short but weary pilgrimage. miserable men, if we 
account ourselves at home in our pilgrimage, if in our journey we 
long not for home! Dost thou see men so in love with their 
native soil, that, even when it is all deformed with the desola- 
tions of war and turned into rude heaps, or while it is even now 
flaming with the fire of civil broils, they covet yet still to live in 
it, preferring it to all other places of more peace and pleasure ? 
and shalt thou, seeing nothing but peace and blessedness at 
home, nothing but trouble abroad, content thyself with a faint 
wish of thy dissolution ? If heaven were thy gaol, thou couldest 
but think of it uncomfortably. O what affection can be worthy 
of such an homel^' 

Chap. XXVII. — lo. Consideration of fit testimonies of Scrip- 
ture concerning our theme. 
Lastly, if we can recall any pregnant testimonies of Scripture 
concerning our theme, those shall fitly conclude this part of our 



72 Practical Wwks. 

meditation : of Scripture ; for that in these matters of God none 
but divine authority can command assent, and settle the con- 
science. Witnesses of holy men may serve for colours, but the 
ground must be only from God. 

" There it isy saith the Spirit of God which cannot deceive thee, 
that all tears shall be wiped Jvom our eyes ; there shall be no 
more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any 
more pain i jea,, there shall not only be an end of sorrows^ but 
an abundant recompense for the sorrows of our life ; as he that 
was rapt up into the third heaven, and there saw what cannot be 
spoken, speaketh yet thus of what he saw : / count, that the 
afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory which 
shall be showed to us. It was showed unto him what should 
hereafter be showed unto us ; and he saw that, if all the world 
full of miseries were laid in one balance, and the least glory of 
heaven in another, those would be incomparably light ; yea, as 
that divine father, that one day^s felicity above were worth a 
thousand years' torment below. What then can be matched with 
the eternity of such joys? how greats therefore, is this 
thy goodness, Lord, which thou hast laid up for them, that 
fear thee ; and done to them that trust in thee, before the sons 
of men!" 

Chap. XXVIII. — Of our second part of meditation ; which is 
in the affections : — wherein is required a taste and relish of 
what we have thought upon. 

Thb most difficult and knotty part of meditation thus finished, 
there remaineth that, which is both more lively and more easy 
unto a good heart, to be wrought altogether by the affections ; 
which if our discourses reach not unto, they prove vain and to no 
purpose. That which followeth therefore is the very soul of 
meditation, whereto all that is past serveth but as an instrument. 
A man is a man by^his understanding part, but he is a Christian 
by his will and affections. 

Seeing therefore that all our former labour of the brain is 
only to affect the heart, after that the mind hath thus traversed 
the point proposed through all the heads of reason, it shall en- 
deavour to find, in the first place, some feeling touch and sweet 
relish in that which it hath thus chewed ; which fruit, through 
the blessing of God, will voluntarily follow upon a serious medi- 
tation. David saith, O taste^ and see how sweet tfie Lord is. 
In meditation we do both see and taste ; but we see before we 



Chap. XXIX.] The Art of Divine Meditation. 73 

taste : sight is of the understanding ; taste, of the affection : 
neither can we see, but we must taste ; we cannot know aright^ but 
we must needs be affected. Let the heart, therefore, first conceive 
and feel in itself the sweetness or bitterness of the matter medi- 
tated ; which is never done without some passion, nor expressed 
without some hearty exclamation. 

*' O blessed estate of the saints I O glory not to be expressed, 
even by those which are glorified ! O incomprehensible salvation I 
What savour hath this earth to thee ? Who can regard the world 
that believeth thee ? Who can think of thee, and not be ravished 
with wonder and desire ? Who can hope for thee, and not rejoice? 
Who can know thee, and not be swallowed up with admiration at 
the mercy of him that bestoweth thee ? O blessedness, worthy of 
Christ's blood to purchase thee I worthy of the continual songs 
of saints and angels to celebrate thee ! How should I magnify 
thee t how should I long for thee ! how should I hate all this 
world for thee I 

Chap. XXIX. — Secondly, a complaint, bewailing cur wants and 

untowardness. 

Aftbb this taste shall follow a complaint, wherein the heart 
bewaileth to itself his own poverty, dulness, and imperfection ; 
chiding and abasing itself in respect of his wants and indisposi- 
tion : wherein humiliation truly goeth before glory ; for the more 
we are cast down in our conceit, the higher shall God lift us up 
at the end of this exercise in spiritual rejoicing. 

"But alas! where is my love? where is my longing? where 
art thou, O my soul ? what heaviness hath overtaken thee ? how 
hath the world bewitched and possessed thee, that thou art be- 
come so careless of thy home, so senseless of spiritual delights, 
so fond upon these vanities ? Dost thou doubt whether there be 
an heaven ? or whether thou have a God and a Saviour there ? 
O far be from thee this atheism : far be from thee the least 
thought of this desperate impiety. Woe were thee, if thou be- 
lievedst not ! But, thou of little faith, dost thou believe there 
is happiness, and ^happiness for thee ; and desirest it not, and 
delightest not in it? Alas! how weak and unbelieving is thy 
belief I how cold and faint are thy desires ! Tell me, what such 
goodly entertainment hast thou met withal here on earth that 
was worthy to withdraw thee from these ^heavenly joys? what 
pleasure in it ever gave thee contentment? or what cause of 
dislike findest thou above? Ono, my soul, it is only thy miserable 



74 Practical Works. 

drowsiness^ only thy security ; the world, the world hath besotted 
thee, hath undone thee with carelessness. Alas ! if thy delight be 
so cold, what difference is there in thee from an ignorant heathen, 
that doubts of another life ? yea, from an epicure, that denies it ? 
Art thou a Christian, or art thou none ! If thou be what thou 
professest, away with this dull and senseless worldliness ; away 
with this earthly uncheerfulness ; shake off at last this profane 
and godless security, that hath thus long weighed thee down from 
mounting up to thy joys. Look up to thy God and to thy 
crown, and say with confidence, Lord, I have waited for thy 
salvationJ^ 

Chap. XXX. — An hearty wish of the soul for what it com- 
plaineth to want, 

Aftbb this complaint must succeed an hearty and passionate 
wish of the soul, which ariseth clearly from the two former de- 
grees ; for that which a man hath found sweet and comfortable, 
and complains that he still wanteth, he cannot but wish to enjoy. 

'' Lord, that I could wait and long for thy salvation ! that 
I could mind the things above I that, as I am a stranger indeed, 
so I could be also in affection ! that mine eyes, like the eyes 
of the first martyr, could, by the light of faith, see but a glimpse 
of heaven ! O that my heart could be rapt up thither in desire ! 
How should I trample upon these poor vanities of the earth ! 
how willingly should I endure all sorrows, all torments I how 
scornfully should I pass by all pleasures I how should I be in 
travail of my dissolution 1 O when shall that blessed day come, 
when, all this wretched worldliness removed, I shall solace myself 
in my God? Behold, as the hart brayeth for the rivers of 
waters, so panteth my soul after thee,0 Ood : my soul thirsteth 
for God, even for the living Chd : O, when shall I come and 
appear before the presence of God F" 

Chap. XXXL — ^4. An humble confession of our disability to effect 
what we wish. 

Aftbb this wishing shall follow humble confession, by just 
order of nature; for having bemoaned our want, and wished 
supply, not finding this hope in ourselves, we must needs acknow- 
ledge it to him, of whom only we may both seek and find ; where 
it is to be duly observed, how the mind is by turns depressed and 
lifted up ; being lifted up with our taste of joy, it is cast down with 
complaint ; lift up with wishes, it is cast down with confession : 



Chap. XXXIII.] The Art of Divine Meditation. 75 

which order doth best hold it in are aod just temper^ and maketh 
it more feeling of the comfort which foUoweth in the concliudonl 
This confession must derogate all from ourselves, and ascribe all 
to God. 

*' Thus I desire^ Lord, to be aright affected towards thee 
and thy glory. I desire to come to thee ; but, alas I how weakly^ 
bow heartlessly I Thou knowest that I can neither come to thee^ 
nor desire to come, but firom thee. It is nature that holds me 
firom thee: this treacherous nature favours itself; loveth the 
world ; hateth to think of a dissolution ; and chooseth rather to 
dwell in this dungeon with continual sorrow and complaint, than 
to endure a parting, although to liberty and joy. Alas, Lord, it 
is my misery that I lore my pain I How long shall these vanities 
thus besot me i It is thou only that canst turn away mine eyes 
from regarding these follies, and my heart from affecting them : 
thou only, who, as thou shalt one day receive my soul into heaven, 
so now beforehand canst fix my soul upon heaven and thee." 

Chap. XXXII. 5. — An earnest petition for that which we confess 

to want. 

Aftbb confession, naturally follows petition ; earnestly request- 
ing that at his liands, which we acknowledge ourselves unable, 
and none but God able to perform. 

"0 carry it up, therefore, thou that hast created and re- 
deemed it, carry it up to thy glory. O let me not always be 
thus dull and brutish : let not these scales of earthly affection 
always dim and blind mine eyes. O thou that layedst clay upon 
the blind man^s eyes, take away this clay from mine eyes; 
wherewith, alas I they are so daubed up, that they cannot see 
heaven. Illuminate them from above, and in thy light let me 
see light. O thou that hast prepared a place for my soul, pre- 
pare my soul for that place ; prepare it with holiness ; prepare it 
with desire; and even while it sojourneth on earth let it dwell 
in heaven with thee, beholding ever the beauty of thy face, the 
glory of thy samts, and of itself." 

Chap. XXXIII. — 6. A vehement enforcement of our petition, 
Aftbb petition, shall follow the enforcement of our request, 
from argument and importunate obsecration: wherein we must 
take heed of complimenting in terms with God; as knowing 
that he will not be mocked by any fashionable form of suit, but 
requireth holy and feeling entreaty. 
"How graciously hast thou proclaimed to the world, that 



76 Practical Works. 

whoever wants wisdom shall ask it of thee^ which neither deniest 
nor npbraidest ! O Lord, I want heavenly wisdom, to conceive 
aright of heaven : I want it, and ask it of thee : give me to ask 
it instantly ; and give me^ according to thy promise, abundantly. 
Thou seest it is no strange favour that I beg of thee : no other 
than that which thou hast richly bestowed upon all thy valiant 
martyrs, confessors, servants, from the beginning; who never 
could have so cheerfully embraced death and torment, if^ through 
the midst of their flames and pain^ they had not seen their crown 
of glory. The poor thief on the cross had no sooner craved thy 
remembrance when thou camest to thy kingdom, than thou pro^ 
misedst to take him with thee into heaven, l^esence was better 
to him than remembrance. Behold^ now thou art in thy king- 
dom; I am on earth: remember thine unworthy servant; and 
let my soul^ in conceit, in affection, in conversation, be this day 
and for ever with thee in paradise. I see, man walketh in a 
vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain: they are pitiful 
pleasures he enjoyeth, while he forgetteth thee : I am as vain ; 
make me more wise : let me see heaven ; and I know I shall 
never envy nor follow them. My times are in thy hand : I am 
no better than my fathers ; a stranger on earth. As I speak of 
them, so the next, yea this generation shall speak of me, as one 
that was. My life is a bubble, a smoke, a shadow, a thought : 
I know it is no abiding in this thoroughfare : O suffer me not so 
mad, as, while I pass on the way, I should forget the end. It is 
that other life that I must trust to : with thee it is that I shall 
continue : let me not be so foolish as to settle myself on what I 
must leave, and to neglect eternity. I have seen enough of this 
earth ; and yet I love it too much : O let me see heaven another 
while ; and love it so much more than the earth, by how much 
the things there are more worthy to be loved. O God, look 
down on thy wretched pilgrim, and teach me to look up to thee, 
and to see thy goodness in the land of the living. Thou, that 
boughtest heaven for me, guide me thither ; and, for the price 
that it cost thee, for thy mercies' sake, in spite of all temptations, 
enlighten thou my soul, direct it, crown it." 

Chap. XXXIV. — 7. A cheerful confidence of obtaining what we 
have requested and enforced. 

AjPTBR this enforcement doth follow confidence; wherein the 
soul, after many doubtful and unquiet bickerings, gathereth up 
her forces, and cheerfully rouseth up itself; and, like one of 



Chap. XXXV.] The Art of Divine Meditation. 77 

Dayiifs worthies, breaketh through a whole armj of doubts^ 
and fetcheth comfort from the well of life ; which, though in 
some later, yet in all, is a sure reward from God of sincere medi- 
tation. 

'' Yea, be then bold, O my soul ; and do not merely crare, but 
challenge this favour of Ood, as that which he oweth thee ; he 
oweth it thee, because he hath promised it ; and by his mercy 
hath made his gift his debt : Faithful is he that hath promised, 
which ivill also do it. Hath he not given thee not only his 
hand in the sweet hopes of the gospel, but his seal also in the 
sacraments ? Yea, besides promise^ hand, seal, bath he not given 
thee a sure earnest of thy salvation in some weak but true graces ? 
Yet more, hath he not given thee, besides earnest, possession ; 
while he, that is the truth and life, saith. He that believeth hath 
everlasting life, and hath passed from death to life ? Canst thou 
not then be content to cast thyself upon this blessed issue ; if Ood 
be merciful, I am glorious : I haye thee already, my life f God 
is faithful, and I do believe : who shall separate me from the love 
of Christ? from my glory with Christ? who shall pull me out of 
my heayen ? Go to then, and return to thy rest, my soul : make 
use of that heaven wherein thou art, and be happy." 

Thus we have found that our meditation, like the vrind, gathereth 
strength in proceeding ; and as natural bodies the nearer they 
come to their places moye with more celerity, so doth the soul in 
this course of meditation, to the unspeakable benefit of itself. 

Chap. XXXV. — The conclusion of our meditation, in what order 
it must be. — First, with thanksgiving. 

Thh conclusion remaineth: wherein we must advise, like as 
physicians do in their sweats and exercise, that we cease not 
over-suddenly, but leave off by little and little. The mind may 
not be suffered to fiEdl headlong from this height, but must also 
descend by degrees. 

The first whereof, after our confidence, shall be an hearty 
gratulation and thanksgiving; for as man naturally cannot be 
miserable, but he must complain and crave remedy ; so the good 
heart cannot find itself happy and not be thankful ; and this 
thankfulness, which it feeleth and expresseth, maketh it yet more 
good, and affecteth it more. 

" What shall I then do to thee for this mercy, thou Saviour 
of men ? what should I render to my Lord for all his benefits ? 
Alas! what can I give thee which is not thine own before? O 



78 Practical W(yrk8, 

that I could giye thee but all thine I Thou givest roe to drink of 
this cup of salvation ; / willy therefore^ take the cup of salvation, 
and call upon the name of the Lord : praise thou the Lord^ 
my soul; and all that is within me praise his holy name. And 
since here thou beginnest thy heaven^ begin here also that joyful 
song of thanksgiving which there thou shalt sing more sweetly, 
and never end. 

Chap. XXXVI. — Secondly, with recommendation of our souls 
and ways to God. 

Aftbr this thanksgiving shall follow a faithful recommendation 
of ourselves to Grod ; wherein Ibhe soul doth cheerfully give up 
itself^ and repose itself wholly upon her Maker and Redeemer ; 
committing herself to him in all her ways ; submitting herself to 
him in all his ways ; desiring in all things to glorify him, and to 
walk worthy of her high and glorious calling. 

Both which latter shall be done, as 1 have ever founds with 
much life and comfort, if, for the full conclusion we shall lifl up 
our heart and voice to God, in singing some versicle of David's 
divine Psalms, answerable to our disposition and matter; whereby 
the heart closes up itself with much sweetness and contentment. 

This course of meditation thus heartily observed, let him that 
practiseth it tell me whether he find not that his soul, which, at 
the beginning of this exercise did but creep and grovel upon 
earthy do not now^ in the conclusion, soar aloft in heaven, and, 
being before aloof off, do not now find itself near to God, yea with 
him and in him. 

Chap. XXXVII. — An epilogue: reproving the neglect; exhorting 
to the use of meditation. 
Thus have I endeavoured, right worshipful sir, according to 
my slender faculty, to prescribe a method of meditation : not 
upon so strict terms of necessity, that whosoever goeth not my 
way erreth. Divers paths lead ofttimes to the same end, and 
every man aboundeth in his own sense. If experience and cus- 
tom hath made another form familiar to any man, I forbid it not ; 
as that learned father said of his translation, *' Let him use his 
own, not contemn mine." If any man be to choose and begin, let 
him practise mine till he meet with a better master. If another 
course may be better, I am sure this is good. Neither is it to 
be suffered, that, like as fantastical men, while they doubt what 
fashioned suit they should wear, put on nothing, so that we 



Chap. XXX VII] The Art of Diviiu Meditation. 79 

Christians should neglect the matter of this worthy business, 
while we nicely stand upon the form thereof. Wherein give me 
leave to complain, with just sorrow and shame, that if there be 
any Christian duty whose omission is notoriously shameful and 
prejudicial to the souls of professors, it is this of meditation. 
This is the very end Qod hath given us our souls for : we mis- 
spend them if we use them not thus. How lamentable is it, that 
we so employ them, as if our faculty of discourse served for nothing 
but our earthly provision! as if our reasonable and Christian 
minds were appointed for the slaves and drudges of this body, 
» only to be the caters and cooks of our appetite ! 

The world filleth us, yea cloyeth us : we find ourselves work 
enough to think ? " What have I yet ? How may I get more ? 
What must I lay out ? What shall I leave for posterity ? How 
may I prevent the wrong of mine adversary ? How may I return 
it? What answer shall I make to such allegations? What enter- 
tainment shall I give to such friends? What courses shall I take 
in such suits ? In what pastime shall I spend this day ? In what 
the next ? What advantage shall I reap by this practice, what 
loss ? What was said, answered, replied, done, followed V* 

Goodly thoughts, and fit for spiritual minds I Say there were 
no other world; how could we spend our cares otherwise? 
Unto this only neglect let me ascribe the commonness of that 
Laodicean temper of men ; or, if that be worse, of the dead cold- 
ness which hath stricken the hearts of many, having left them 
nothing but the bodies of men, and vizors of Christians ; to this 
only — they have hot meditated. It is not more impossible to live 
without an heart, than to be devout without meditation. Would 
God, therefore, my words could be in this, as the Wise Man 
saith the words of the wise are, like unto goads in the sides 
of every reader, to quicken him up, out of this dull and lazy 
security, to a cheerful practice of this divine meditation. Let 
him curse me upon his deathbed, if, looking back from thence to 
the bestowing of his former times, he acknowledge not these 
hours placed the most happily in his whole life ; if he then wish 
not he had worn out more days in so profitable and heavenly a 
work ! 

DBG SOLI OLOSLL. 



80 



A MEDITATION OF DEATH, 

ACCORDING TO THE FORMER RULES. 



The entrance* 

And now^ mj soul^ that thou hast thought of the end, what 
can fit thee better than to think of the way ? And though the 
forepart of the way to heaven be a good life, the latter and 
more immediate is death. Shall I call it the way, or the gate of 
life ? Sure I am, that by it only we pass into that blessedness ; 
whereof we have so thought^ that we hare found it cannot be 
thought of enough. 

The description. 

What then is this death but the taking down of these sticks, 
whereof this earthly tent is composed? the separation of two 
great and old friends, till they meet again ? the gaol-delivery of 
a long prisoner ? our journey into that other worlds for which we 
and this thoroughfare were made ? our payment of our first debt 
to nature ; the sleep of the body and the awaking of the soul ? 

Tfie division. 
But, lest thou shouldest seem to flatter him whose name and 
face hath ever seemed terrible to others, remember that there 
are more deaths than one : if the first death be not so fearful as 
he is made, his horror lying more in the conceit of the beholder 
than in his own aspect, surely the second is not made so fearful 
as he is. No living eye can behold the terrors thereof; il is as 
impossible to see them, as to feel them and live. Nothing but a 
name is common to both. The first hath men, casualties, diseases, 
for his executioners ; the second, devils : the power of the first is 
in the grave ; the second, in hell : the worst of the first is sense- 
lessness ; the easiest of the second is a perpetual sense of all the 
pain that can make a man exquisitely miserable. 

7%6 causes. 

Thou shalt have no business, O my soul, with the second 

death: thy first resurrection hath secured thee. Thank him 

that hath redeemed thee for, thy safety. And how can I thank 

thee enough, O my Saviour, which hast so mercifully bought off 



A Meditation of Death. 81 

my torment with thy own ; and hast drunk off that bitter potion 
of thy Father's wrath, whereof the very taste had been our 
death ? Yea, such is thy mercy, O thou Redeemer of men, that 
thou hast not only subdued the second death, but reconciled the 
first : so as thy children taste not at all of the second ; and find 
the first so sweetened to them by thee, that they complain not of 
bitterness. It was not thou, O God, that madest death: our 
hands are they that were guilty of this evil. Thou sawest all thy 
work that it was good: we brought forth sin, and sin brought 
forth death. To the discharge of thy justice and mercy we 
acknowledge this miserable conception: and needs must that 
child be ugly that hath such parents. Certainly, if being and 
good be, as they are, of an equal extent, then the dissolution of 
our being must needs in itself be evil. How full of darkness and 
horror then is the privation of this vital light, especially since thy 
wisdom intended it to the revenge of sin, which is no less than 
the violation of an infinite justice ! It was thy just pleasure to 
plague us with this brood of our own begetting. Behold, that 
death, which was not till then in the world, is now in every thing : 
one great conqueror finds it in a slate ; another finds it in a fly : 
one finds it in the kernel of a grape ; another in the prick of a 
thorn : one, in the taste of an herb ; another, in the smell of a 
flower: one, in a bit of meat; another, in a mouthful of air: 
one, in the very sight of a danger ; another, in the conceit of 
what might have been. Nothing in all our life is too little to 
hide death under it. There need no cords, nor knives, nor 
Bwords, nor pieces : we have made ourselves as many ways to 
death as there are helps of living. But if we were the authors 
of our death, it was thou that didst alter it : our disobedience 
made it ; and thy mercy made it not to be evil. It had been all 
one to thee to have taken away the very being of death from 
thine own ; but thou thoughtest it best to take away the sting of 
it only : as good physicians, when they would apply their leeches, 
scour them with salt and nettles; and when their corrupt blood is 
voided, employ them to the health of the patient It is more 
glory to thee that thou hast removed enmity from this Esau; 
that now he meets us with kisses instead of frowns : and if we re- 
ceive a blow from this rough hand, yet that very stripe is heaUng. 
how much more powerful is thy death than our sin I O my Sa- 
viour, how hast thou perfumed and softened this bed of my grave 
by dying ! How can it grieve me to tread in thy steps to glory ? 

BP. HALL, VOL. VI. O 



88 Practical Works, 

The effects. 

Our sin mAde deatb our last enemy : thy goodness hath made 
it the first friend that we meet with in our passage to another 
world : for, as she that receives us from the knees of our mother 
in our first entrance to the light, washeth, cleanseth, dresseth us^ 
and presents us to the breast of our nurse or the arms of our 
mother, challenges some interest in us when we come to our 
growth ; so death, which^ in our passage to that other life is the 
first that reoeiyes and presents our naked souls to the hands of 
those angels which carry it up to her glory^ cannot but think 
this office friendly and meritorious. What, if this guide lead my 
carcass through corruption and rottenness, when my soul, in the 
▼ery instant of her separation knows itself happy ? What if my 
friends mourn about my bed and coffin, when my soul sees the 
smiling face and loying embracements of him that was dead 
and is ahye ? What care I who shuts these earthen eyes when 
death opens the eye of my soul to see as I am seen ? What if 
my name be forgotten of men^ when I lire above with the God of 
spirits? 

The svhject. 

If death would be still an enemy, it is the worst part of me 
that he hath any thing to do withal ; the best is above his reach ; 
and gains more than the other can lose. The worst piece of the 
horror of death is the grave : and, set aside infidelity, what so 
great misery is this ? That part which is corrupted feels it not : 
that which is free from corruption feels an abundant recompense, 
and foresees a joyful reparation. What is here, but a just resti- 
tution? We carry heaven and earth wrapt up in 'our bosoms; 
each part returns homeward; and if the exceeding glory of 
heaven cannot countervail the dolesomeness of the grave, what 
do I believing I but, if the beauty of that celestial sanctuary do 
more than equalize the horror of the bottomless pit, how can I 
shrink at earth like myself, when I know my glory? And if 
examples can move thee any whit, look behind thee, O my soul, 
and see which of the worthies of that ancient latter world, which 
of the patriarchs, kings, prophets, apostles, have not trod in these 
red steps. Where are those millions of generations which have 
hitherto peopled the earth ? How many passing-bells hast thou 
heard for thy known friends I how many sick beds hast thou 
visited I how many eyes hast thou seen closed I how many vain 
men hast thou seen that have gone into the field to seek death. 



A Meditation of Death. 83 

in hope to find an honour as foolish as themselves I how many 
poor creatures hast thou mulcted with death for thine own plea- 
sure ! And caust thou hope that God will make a by-way and a 
postern for thee alone^ that thou mayest pass to the next world, 
not by the gates of death, not by the bottom of the grave ? 

The adjunct. 
What then dost thou fear, O my soul? There are but two 
stages of death, the bed and the grave ; this latter, if it have 
senselessness, yet it hath rest ; the former, if it have pain, yet it 
hath speediness ; and when it lights upon a faithful heart meets 
with many and strong antidotes of comfort. The evil that is 
ever in motion, is not fearful : that which both time and eternity 
finds standing where it was is worthy of terror. Well may those 
tremble at death which find more distress within than without ; 
whose consciences are more sick and nearer to death than thehr 
bodies* It was thy Father's wrath that did so terrify thy soul, 
O my Saviour, that it put thy body into a bloody sweat. The 
mention and thought of thy death ended in a psalm ; but this 
began in an agony. Then didst thou sweat out my fears. The 
power of that agony doth more comfort all thine, than the 
angels could comfort thee. That very voice deserved an eternal 
separation of horror from death, where thou saidst. My God, my 
Chdy why hast thou foreaJcen me f Thou hadst not complained 
of being left, if thou wouldest have any of thine left destitute of 
comfort in their parting. I know not whom I can fear while I 
know whom I have believed : how can I be discouraged with the 
sight of my loss, when I see so clear an advantage ? 

The contrary. 
What discomfort is this, to leave a frail body to be joined unto 
a glorious head ? to forsake vain pleasures, false honours, boot- 
less hopes, unsatisfying wealth, stormy contentments, sinful men, 
perilous temptations, a sea of troubles, a galley of servitude, an 
evil world and a consuming life, for freedom, rest, happiness, 
eternity ? And if thou wert sentenced, O my soul, to live a thou- 
sand years in this body with these infirmities, how wouldst thou 
be weary ; not of being only, but of complaining : where, ere the 
first hundred, I should be a child ; ere the second, a beast ; a 
stone, ere the third ; and therefore should be so far from finding 
pleasure in my continuance, that I should not have sense enough 
left to feel myself miserable I And when I am once gone, what 
difference is there betwixt the agedest of the first patriarchs and 



84 Practical Works. 

me, and the child that did but lire to be born, save only in what 
was! and that which was is not. And if this body had no weak- 
ness to make my life tedious, yet, what a torment is it, that while 
I liye I must sin I Alas, my soul^ every one of thy known sins is 
not a disease, but a death ! What an enemy art thou to thyself, 
if thou canst not be content, that one bodily death should excuse 
thee from many spiritual ; to cast off thy body that thou mayest 
be stripped of the rags^ yea, the fetters of thy sin> and clothed 
with the robes of glory? Tet these terms are too hard: thou 
shalt not be oast off, O my body : rather thou shalt be put to 
making. This change is no less happy for thee than for thy 
partner. This very skin of thine, which is now tawny and 
wrinkledj shall once shine : this earth shall be heaven : this dust 
shall be glorious : these eyes, that are now weary of being wit- 
nesses of thy sins and miseries, shall then never be weary of 
seeing the beauty of thy Saviour, and thine own in his : these 
ears, that have been now tormented with the impious tongues of 
men^ shall first hear the voice of the Son of God ; and then the 
voices of saints and angels in their songs of hallelujah : and this 
tongue^ that now complains of miseries and fears^ shall then bear 
a part in that divine harmony. 

T/ie comparisons. 
In the mean time thou shalt but sleep in this bed of earth. 
He that hath tried the worst of death hath called it no worse. 
Very heathens have termed them cousins ; and it is no unusual 
thing for cousins of blood to carry both the same names and fea^ 
tures. Hast thou wont, O my body^ when the day hath wearied 
thee^ to he down not unwillingly to thy rest? behold, in this 
sleep there is more quietness, more pleasure of visions^ more cer- 
tainty of wakings more cheerfulness in rising ; why then art thou 
loath to think of laying off thy rags and reposing thyself? why 
aft thou like a child unwilling to go to bed ? Hast thou ever seen 
any bird, which^ when the cage hath been opened, would rather 
sit still and sing within her grates^ than fly forth unto her freedom 
in the woods? Hast thou ever seen any prisoner in love with his 
bolts and fetters ? Did the chief of the apostles^ when the angel 
of God shined in his gaol, and struck him on the side, and loosed 
his two chains^ and bade him arise quickly, and opened both the 
wooden and iron gate, say, *' What I so soon ? yet a little sleep ?" 
What madness had it been, rather to slumber betwixt his two 
keepers, than to follow the angel of God into liberty ? Hast thou 



A Meditation of Death, 85 

ever seen any mariner that bath sainted the sea with songs and 
the haven with tears ? What shall I say to this diflSdence^ O my 
soul^ that thou art unwilling to think of rest after thy toil ; of 
freedom after thy durance ; of the haven after an unquiet and 
tempestuous passage ? How many are there that seek death and 
cannot find it I merely out of the irksomeness of life. Hath it 
found thee^ and offered thee better conditions ; not of immunity 
from evils, but of possession of more good than thou canst think ; 
and wouldest thou now fly from happiness to be rid of it? 

The names. 
What I is it a name that troubles thee ? What if men 
would call sleep death ; wouldest thou be afraid to close thine 
eyes ? What hurt is it then, if he, that sent the first sleep upon 
man whilst he made him an helper^ send this last and soundest 
bleep upon me while he prepares my soul for a glorious spouse 
to himself? It is but a parting which we call death; as two 
friends, when they haVe led each other on the way, shake hands 
tiU they return from their journey. If either could miscarry^ 
there were cause of sorrow ; now they^are more sure of a meet- 
ing than of a partnre, what folly is it not to be content to redeem 
the unspeakable gain of so dear a friend with a little intermission 
of enjoying him ! He will return laden with the riches of heay^i ; 
and will fetch his old partner to the participation of this glorious 
wealth. Go then, my soul, to' this sure and gainful traffick ; and 
leave my other half in an harbour as safe, though not so blessed ; 
yet so shalt thou be separated, that my very dust shall be united 
to thee still, and to my Saviour in thee. 

The testimonies. 
Wert thou unwilling^ at the command of thy Creator, to join 
thyself at the first with this body of mine ? why art thou then 
loath to part with that which thou hast found, though entire, 
yet troublesome? Dost thou not hear Solomon say, The day of 
death is better than the day of thy birth? dost thou not believe 
him ? or art thou in love with the worse and displeased with the 
better ! If any man could have found a life worthy to be pre- 
ferred unto death, so great a king must needs have done it: 
now in his very throne he commends his coffin. Yea, what wilt 
thou say to those heathens, that mourned at the birth, and 
feasted at the death of their children ? They knew the miseries 
of living, as well as thou : the happiness of dying they could not 



86 Practical Works. 

know ; and if they rejoiced out of a conceit of ceasing to be 
miserable, how shouldest thou cheer thyself in an expectation, 
yea an assurance, of being happy I He that is the Lord of life, 
and tried what it was to die, hath proclaimed them blessed that 
die in the Lord. Those are blessed, I know, that lire in him ; 
but they rest not from their labours : toil and sorrow is between 
them and a perfect enjoying of that blessedness which they now 
possess only in hope and inchoation: when death hath added 
rest, their happiness is finished. 

The taste of our meditation, 
O death, how sweet is that rest wherewith thou refreshest the 
weary pilgrims of this vale of mortality I how pleasant is thy 
face to those eyes that have acquainted themselyes with the sight 
of it, which to strangers is grim and ghastly I how worthy art 
thou to be welcome unto those that know whence thou art, and 
whither thou tendest ! Who that knows thee can fear thee ? who 
that is not all nature would rather hide himself amongst the bag- 
gage of this vile life, than follow thee to a crown ? What indif- 
ferent judge^ that should see life painted oyer with yain sem- 
blances of pleasures, attended with troops of sorrows on the one 
side, and on the other with uncertainty of continuance and cer- 
tainty of dissolution ; and then should turn his eyes unto death, 
and see her black, but comely, attended on the one hand with a 
momentary. pain, with eternity of glory on the other; would not 
say, out of choice, that which the prophet said out of passion. It 
is better for me to die than to live f 

The complaint. 
But, O my soul, what ails thee to be thus suddenly backward 
and fearful ? No heart hath more freely discoursed of death in 
speculation : no tongue hath more extolled it in absence. And 
now, that it is come to thy bed's side, and hath drawn thy cur- 
tains, and takes thee by the hand, and offers ihee service, thou 
shrinkest inward, and, by the paleness of thy face and wildness 
of thine eye, bewrayest an amazement at the presence of such a 
guest. That face which was so familiar to thy thoughts is now 
unwelcome to thine eyes. I am ashamed of this weak irresolu- 
tion. Whitherto have tended all thy serious meditations ? What 
hath Christianity done to thee^ if thy fears be still heathenish t 
Is this thine imitation of so many worthy siunts of God^ whom 
thou hast seen entertain the violentest deaths with smiles and 



A Meditation of Death. 87 

songs? Is this the fruit of thy long and frequent instruction? 
Didst thou think death would have been content with words? 
didst thou hope it would suffice thee to talk, while all other 
suffer ? Where is thy faith ? yea, where art thou thyself, O my 
soul ? Is hearen worthy of no more thanks, no more joy ? Shall 
heretics, shall pagans give death a better welcome than thou? 
Hath thy Maker, thy Redeemer, sent for thee; and art thou 
loath to go? hath he sent for thee, to put thee in possession of 
that glorious inheritance which thy wardship hath cheerfully 
expected, and art thou loath to go ? Hath God, with this ser- 
geant of his, sent his angels to fetch thee, and art thou loath to 
go ? Rouse up thyself for shame, O my soul ; and, if ever thou 
hast truly believed, shake off this unchristian diffidence, and ad- 
dress thyself joyfully for thy glory. 

The wish. 
Yea, O my Lord, it is thou that must raise up this faint and 
drooping heart of mine : thou only canst rid me of this weak and 
cowardly distrust : thou, that sendest for my soul, canst prepare 
it for thyself: thou only canst make thy messenger welcome to 
me. O, that I could but see thy face through death ! O, that I 
could see death, not as it was, but as thou hast made it I O, that 
I could heartily pledge thee, my Saviour, in this cup ; that so I 
might drink new vrine with thee in thy Father^ kingdom I 

The confession. 
Bat alas! O my God, nature is strong and weak in me at 
once ! I cannot wish to welcome death, as it is worthy : when I 
look for most courage, I find strongest temptations: I see and 
confess, that when I am myself, thou hast no snch coward as I. 
Let me alone, and I shall shame that name of thine which 
X have professed : every secure worldling shall laugh at my fee- 
bleness. God, were thy martyrs thus haled to their stakes? 
might they not have been loosed from their racks, and chose to 
die in those torments? Let it be no shame for thy servant to take 
up that complaint which thou madest of thy better attendants, 
The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. 

The petition and enforcement. 

thou God of spirits, that hast coupled these two together, 

unite them in a desire of their dissolution ; weaken this flesh to 

receive, and encourage this spirit either to desire or to contemn 

death ; and now, as I grow nearer to my home, let me increase 



88 Practical Works. 

in the sense of my joys. I am thine ; save me^ O Lord. It was 
thou that didst put such courage into thine ancient and late wit- 
nesses, that they either invited or challenged death; and held 
their persecutors their best friends, for letting them loose from 
these gives of flesh. I know thine hand is not shortened ; neither 
any of them hath received more proofs of thy former mercies. 

let thy goodness enable me to reach them in the comfortable 
steadiness of my passage. Do but draw this veil a little, that I 
may see my glory, and I cannot but be inflamed with the desire 
of it. It was not I, that either made this body for the earth, or 
this soul for my body, or this heaven for my soul, or this glory of 
heaven, or this entrance into glory : all is thine own work. 
perfect what thou hast begun, that thy praise and my happiness 
may be consummate at once. 

The assurance or confidence. 
Yeav O my soul, what needest thou wish the God of mercies to 
be tender of his own honour ? Art thou not a member of that 
body whereof thy Saviour is the head ? Canst thou drown, when 
thy Head ia abo^e ? Was it not for thee that he triumphed over 
death ? Is there any fear in a foiled adversary ? O my Redeemer, 

1 have already overcome in thee : how can I miscarry in myself? 
O my soul, thou hast marched valiantly I Behold, the damsels of 
that heavenly Jerusalem come forth with timbrels and harps to 
meet thee, and to applaud thy success : and now, there remains 
nothing for thee but a crown of righteousness^ which tliat 
righteous Judge shall give thee at that day : deaih, where is 
thy sting ? O grave, where is thy victory ? 

The thanksgiving. 
Return now unto thy rest, my soul; for the Lord hath been 
beneficial unto thee. O Lord God, the strength of my salvation, 
thou hast covered my head in the day of battle : O my God and 
King, I will extol thee, and wiU bless thy name for ever and 
ever. I will bless thee daily, and praise thy name for ever and 
ever. Cheat is the Lord, and most worthy to be praisedj and 
his greatness is incomprehensible : I will meditate of the beauty 
of thy glorious majesty, and thy wonderful works : Hosanna, 
thou that dv^ellest in the highest heavens. Amen. 
